---
title: "Md. Mustafa v. Haji Md. Isa, AIR 1987 Pat 5"
date: 2024-5-18 00:00:00 +0530
categories: [Case Summaries]
tags: [Notice, Property Law]
---

# Md. Mustafa v. Haji Md. Isa, AIR 1987 Pat 5

Judge: RAMANANDAN PRASAD

## Facts

* Plaintiff contended that he was a tenant staying in a small portion of the property owned by Md. Isa. He further contended that he had entered into an agreement with the owner for the purchase of that small portion of the house and he had managed to arrange consideration money for the same. However, he alleged that the owner did not execute the sale deed even when he asked him to do so.

* Plaintiff alleged that the defendant executed a sale deed without consideration with the owner. He claimed that the sale deed with the defendant was fraudulent and has no legal effect as it was executed without a consideration.

* Defendant claimed that the owner was in need of money and so wanted to sell the house. The sale deed between the parties, according to the defendant, was executed after the owner received full consideration from the defendant. They further submitted that the owner had directed all the tenants in the house to pay their rents to the defendant.

* Further, the defendant claimed that they were **bona fide purchasers for value without any notice** of alleged agreement between the plaintiff and the owner.

> NOTE: **Bona fide purchaser for value without notice**
> A bona fide purchaser for value (BFP), aka Bona fide purchaser for value without notice, refers to an innocent party who purchases property without notice of any other party’s claim to the title of that property. Consists of the following 3 Components:
>
> **Bona Fide:** The term “bona fide” comes from Latin and means “in good faith.” A bona fide person acts with honesty, sincerity, and a genuine intention.
>
> **Purchaser for Value:** A bona fide purchaser is someone who acquires property by paying for it or providing some form of consideration (such as money or property) in exchange. This distinguishes them from beneficiaries of gifts.
>
> **Without Notice:** The critical aspect is that the purchaser must not have any knowledge or notice of competing claims or defects in the property’s title. If they buy the property without such notice, they are considered bona fide purchasers.
>
> Thus, **a bona fide purchaser for value is an innocent party who acquires property honestly, pays for it, and has no knowledge of any conflicting claims to the property’s title.** This concept is essential in property law to protect the rights of innocent buyers.
>  

## Issue

* Whether defendants are bona fide purchasers for value without notice of the agreement between the plaintiff and Md. Isa.

## Observations of the Court and Decision

* Principle of actual possession under constructive notice is given under S.3, Explanation II.

* Here the petitioner was in possession of 1/7th portion of the building. He along with 6 other tenants lived in the said house, each presumably having possession of share equal to that of the petitioner. Thus, the house was not solely in his possession. He held possession only of a small portion of the house.

* In **Hari Charan Kaur v. Kaula Rai AIR 1917 Pat. 478** (full bench judgement), where the petitioner was in possession of 1/3rd of the property, no constructive notice was held to be made under the meaning of the act. Court said in the present case, the possession is even lesser.

* In **Kesharmull Agarwala v. Rajendra Prasad (1968) BLJR 28**, the decision of the above case was followed. It was further held that where there are more than one occupant in the property, the purchaser is not bound to make an enquiry from every tenant, especially when the owner himself is occupying a portion and an enquiry has been made from him.

* Using precedents, the court evolved the following **principle** regarding constructive notice in cases of actual possession:

   * Cannot be extended to cases in which the person basing his claim is in possession of only a small fraction of the property.
 
   * In such cases the purchaser is not bound to make enquiry about previous contracts from any of the tenants in occupation of the house.
 
   * Court cannot presume that the purchaser will have notice, if any, of any person who is for the time being in actual possession of a small portion of the property in question.

* Regarding the plea of the defendant being bona fide purchasers for value without notice, the court said that to defeat a suit for specific performance of contract, the burden to prove want of notice initially lies on the purchasers. However, as this burden is a light one, it easily shifts to the other party by mere denial on part of the purchasers. Once shifted, the other party has to prove that the purchaser had prior knowledge of the pre-existing contract. Once evidence is provided by both the parties, it becomes a question of appreciating evidence and the question of burden loses its importance.

* HELD: The purchasers had no notice of prior agreement. As they were bona fide purchasers for value and without notice, they weren't held to be bound by any pre-existing contract between the vendor and the plaintiff. Thus, no decree for specific performance was passed.
