---
title: "H.N. Narayanaswamy Naidu v. Smt. Deveeramma, AIR 1981 Kant 93"
date: 2024-5-19 00:00:00 +0530
categories: [Case Summaries]
tags: [Notice, Property Law]
---

# H.N. Narayanaswamy Naidu v. Smt. Deveeramma, AIR 1981 Kant 93

Judge: G.N. SABHAHIT

## Facts

* Here a conditional sale took place between sellers (D1: Son and D2 Mother) and the plaintiff. The condition was that the property, which was being sold, would revert back to the sellers in case they pay the entire amount of consideration after 6 years and within 6 months thereafter (agreement to re-convey).

* Subsequently, the sellers were in need of money and they further executed an agreement under which they were to release the agreement of re-conveyance.

* The plaintiff had taken possession of the property after the initial sale and after the execution of release deed, carried major repairs in the property at his own cost.

* The sellers however sold the right to re-conveyance to another person (D3) without telling him about the release deed.

* Plaintiff approached the court for the purpose of getting his release deed executed. D3, by claiming to be a bona fide purchaser of the re-conveyance rights without notice wanted the enforcement of the same. 

## Issue

* Whether D3 was a bona fide purchaser for value without notice of the right to get re-conveyance from D1 and D2?

## Observations of the Court and Decision

* The court held that given the plaintiff was in actual possession of the property, almost as its owner but for the reconveyance deed, it was the duty of D3, stipulated by TPA, 1882, u/s 3., to have enquired about the plaintiff's rights.

* Examining certain exhibits like the one stating that before the properties are re-conveyed, the costs for major repairs shall be paid to plaintiff and the one indicating the background of litigation history under which the rights in question were attached, the court said that, this background, an average prudent man ought to have enquired from the plaintiff about her rights or the amount spent on major repairs, etc. 

* The court ultimately held that had it not been for the wilful absentation on part of D3, he would have come to know of the entirety of its facts and hence, he should be deemed to have notice of the rights of the plaintiff. 
